**Research Title:**

**ARIMA vs LSTM vs Stacked LSTM vs Bi-Directional LSTM for Stock and
Cryptocurrency Prediction**

**1.3 Aim:**

To create and evaluate models capable of predicting stock and
cryptocurrency time series data using ARIMA and different LSTM-based
models (standard LSTM, Stacked LSTM, and Bidirectional LSTM). The
comparison aims to identify which model performs best across different
datasets.

**1.4 Research Questions:**

1.  Which among the ARIMA and LSTM models performs better in predicting
    stock and cryptocurrency data?

2.  Does the stacked LSTM model outperform the bidirectional LSTM model
    in predicting stock and cryptocurrency data?

**1.5 Objectives:**

-   Conduct a literature review on stock and cryptocurrency prediction
    using neural network models, analyzing existing research,
    objectives, algorithms, experimentation, and results.

-   Collect and preprocess four datasets: two stock datasets (Rolls
    Royce, Rio Tinto) and two cryptocurrency datasets (Bitcoin,
    Ethereum).

-   Implement the traditional ARIMA model for predicting stock and
    cryptocurrency prices.

-   Train and test LSTM, Bidirectional LSTM, and Stacked LSTM models for
    stock and cryptocurrency prediction.

-   Critically evaluate and compare the performance of these models
    across all datasets using metrics such as Mean Squared Error (MSE),
    Mean Absolute Error (MAE), Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE), and
    R-squared (R²).

**4. Implementation:**

The implementation phase involves collecting, preprocessing, and
applying ARIMA and LSTM models to the chosen stock and cryptocurrency
datasets.

**4.1 Cryptocurrency Data Collection:**

You have gathered four datasets:

-   Rolls Royce stock data (RR.L)

-   Rio Tinto plc stock data (RIO.L)

-   Bitcoin data (BTC-USD)

-   Ethereum data (ETH-EUR)

Each dataset varies in size and content, with both stock and
cryptocurrency data containing around 2400 to 3600 rows and 7 columns.

**4.2 Preprocessing:**

Preprocessing involves handling missing values and preparing the data
for model input. Rolls Royce and Bitcoin data had no missing values,
while Rio Tinto and Ethereum datasets had 6 missing values each. No
duplicates were found in any dataset.

**4.3 Visualization:**

Visualization includes plotting time series graphs of the closing prices
against corresponding dates to identify trends, volatility, and patterns
in the data.

**4.4 Setup for Implementation:**

This includes:

-   **4.4.1 Splitting Stock and Crypto Data:** Partitioning data into
    training and testing sets.

-   **4.4.2 Reshaping Stock and Crypto Data:** Reshaping data into a
    suitable format (from 2D to 3D) for neural network processing.

**4.5 LSTM Implementation:**

The LSTM model was trained on stock and cryptocurrency data. Results
show varied performance across datasets, with Rolls Royce and Rio Tinto
showing relatively higher R² values compared to Bitcoin and Ethereum,
which showed lower performance, potentially due to their higher
volatility.

**4.6 Stacked LSTM Implementation:**

Stacked LSTM models, which layer multiple LSTM cells, were trained.
Rolls Royce and Rio Tinto performed better than Bitcoin and Ethereum,
suggesting that stacked LSTMs might struggle with more volatile or
complex time series data like cryptocurrencies.

**4.7 Bidirectional LSTM Implementation:**

Bidirectional LSTMs, which process input sequences in both forward and
backward directions, were also trained. These models showed mixed
performance, with some improvement over standard LSTMs for stocks but
less consistent results for cryptocurrencies, particularly in volatile
periods.

**Conclusion:**

The research will conclude by comparing the performance of ARIMA, LSTM,
Stacked LSTM, and Bidirectional LSTM models across all datasets. The
results will help determine which model is most effective for predicting
stock and cryptocurrency

4o

**You said:**

write a readme file for GitHub with
overview,objectives,Features,Installation,usage,Data,Contributing,License
for the above research ARIMA vs LSTM vs Stacked LSTM vs Bi-Directional
LSTM for Stock and Cryptocurrency Prediction

**ChatGPT said:**

ChatGPT

Here's a template for the README file on GitHub for the project titled
\"ARIMA vs LSTM vs Stacked LSTM vs Bi-Directional LSTM for Stock and
Cryptocurrency Prediction\":

**ARIMA vs LSTM vs Stacked LSTM vs Bi-Directional LSTM for Stock and
Cryptocurrency Prediction**

**Overview**

This project explores and compares the effectiveness of different time
series prediction models, specifically ARIMA, LSTM, Stacked LSTM, and
Bi-Directional LSTM, in forecasting stock and cryptocurrency prices. The
aim is to evaluate the predictive performance of these models on both
stock (e.g., Apple, Google) and cryptocurrency (e.g., Bitcoin, Ethereum)
datasets, focusing on metrics such as Mean Squared Error (MSE), Root
Mean Squared Error (RMSE), Mean Absolute Error (MAE), and R-squared. The
project leverages historical market data to train and test these models,
providing insights into their suitability for financial forecasting.

**Objectives**

-   **Model Comparison**: Evaluate and compare the performance of ARIMA,
    LSTM, Stacked LSTM, and Bi-Directional LSTM models for stock and
    cryptocurrency price prediction.

-   **Performance Metrics**: Analyze models using MSE, RMSE, MAE, and
    R-squared to determine the most effective model.

-   **Feature Engineering**: Explore the impact of various features
    (e.g., historical prices, volume) on the prediction accuracy.

-   **Forecasting Accuracy**: Assess the models\' ability to predict
    future prices based on historical data.

**Features**

-   **Data Preprocessing**: Handling missing data, normalizing features,
    and splitting data into training and testing sets.

-   **Model Implementation**: Code implementations of ARIMA, LSTM,
    Stacked LSTM, and Bi-Directional LSTM models.

-   **Performance Evaluation**: Detailed evaluation of model performance
    using various metrics.

-   **Visualization**: Graphical representations of predicted vs. actual
    prices, model loss, and error metrics.

-   **Comparative Analysis**: Side-by-side comparison of models on
    different financial datasets.

**Installation**

To run this project locally, follow these steps:

1.  **Clone the repository**:

> bash
>
> Copy code
>
> git clone https://github.com/Raju-22/Stock-Crypto-Prediction.git

2.  **Navigate to the project directory**:

> bash
>
> Copy code
>
> cd Stock-Crypto-Prediction

3.  **Create a virtual environment (optional but recommended)**:

> bash
>
> Copy code
>
> python -m venv venv

4.  **Activate the virtual environment**:

    -   On Windows:

> bash
>
> Copy code
>
> venv\\Scripts\\activate

-   On macOS/Linux:

> bash
>
> Copy code
>
> source venv/bin/activate

5.  **Install the required dependencies**:

> bash
>
> Copy code
>
> pip install -r requirements.txt

**Usage**

Once the environment is set up, you can start training and evaluating
models:

1.  **Preprocess the Data**:

    -   Use the provided scripts to clean and prepare your dataset for
        model training.

2.  **Train Models**:

    -   Execute the training scripts for each model:

> bash
>
> Copy code
>
> python train_arima.py
>
> python train_lstm.py
>
> python train_stacked_lstm.py
>
> python train_bilstm.py

3.  **Evaluate Models**:

    -   After training, evaluate the models using the evaluation
        scripts:

> bash
>
> Copy code
>
> python evaluate_models.py

4.  **Visualize Results**:

    -   Visualize predictions vs. actual prices using:

> bash
>
> Copy code
>
> python visualize_predictions.py

**Data**

The datasets used in this project include historical price data for
stocks and cryptocurrencies. The data can be sourced from financial APIs
or platforms like:

-   [[Yahoo Finance]{.underline}](https://finance.yahoo.com/)

-   [[Alpha Vantage]{.underline}](https://www.alphavantage.co/)

-   [[CoinGecko]{.underline}](https://www.coingecko.com/)

Ensure that the datasets include features such as Open, High, Low,
Close, Volume, and Date.

**Contributing**

Contributions are welcome! If you\'d like to contribute, please fork the
repository and use a feature branch. Pull requests are warmly welcome.

1.  **Fork the repository**:

    -   Click on the Fork button at the top right of this page.

2.  **Clone your fork**:

> bash
>
> Copy code
>
> git clone https://github.com/Raju-22/Stock-Crypto-Prediction.git

3.  **Create a branch**:

> bash
>
> Copy code
>
> git checkout -b feature-branch

4.  **Make your changes**.

5.  **Commit and push your changes**:

> bash
>
> Copy code
>
> git add .
>
> git commit -m \'Add some feature\'
>
> git push origin feature-branch

6.  **Create a pull request**.

